Add lightweight token doc to library section (#36144)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/lightweight-tokens.md

# Optimizing client app size with lightweight tokens

> You can manage the dependency structure among your components and injectable services such that code for a specific service that is never needed can be eliminated at compile time, resulting in smaller bundles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manage the dependency structure among your components and injectable services by eliminating at compile time any unnecessary code for a specific service, resulting in smaller bundles.
```

Tree-shakable-providers are the preferred way to make sure that a service is included in the bundle only when it is used.

> Because of the way Angular stores injection tokens, however, it is possible that such a component or service can end up in the bundle anyway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, due to the way Angular stores injection tokens, an unused component or service can end up in the bundle anyway.
```

> This page describes a DI design pattern that supports proper tree-shaking by using *lightweight tokens*.

Reviewer: What is a "DI" design pattern? Can we spell that out along with the acronym?

> The lightweight token design pattern is especially important for library developers, to ensure that when an application uses only some of your library's capabilities, the unused code can be eliminated from the client's app bundle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lightweight token design pattern is especially important for library developers to ensure that when an application uses only some of your library's capabilities, the unused code can be eliminated from the client's app bundle.
```

When an application uses your library, there might be some services that your library supplies which the client app doesn't use.
In this case, the app developer should expect that service to be tree-shaken, and not contribute to the size of the compiled app.
Because the application developer cannot know about or remedy a tree-shaking problem in the library, it is the responsibility of the library developer to do so.

> To prevent the retention of unused components, your library should use the lightweight-token design pattern described here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent the retention of unused components, your library should use the lightweight-token design pattern.
```

## When tokens are retained

To better explain the condition under which token retention occurs, consider a library that provides a library-card component, which contains a body and can contain an optional header.

```
<lib-card>
  <lib-header>...</lib-header>
</lib-card>
```

In a likely implementation, the `<lib-card>` component uses `@ContentChild()` or `@ContentChildren()` to obtain `<lib-header>` and `<lib-body>`, as in the following.

```
@Component({
  selector: 'lib-header',
  ...,
})
class LibHeaderComponent {}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-card',
  ...,
})
class LibCardComponent {
  @ContentChild(LibHeaderComponent)
  header: LibHeaderComponent|null = null;
}
```

Because `<lib-header>` is optional, the element can appear in the template in its minimal form,
`<lib-card></lib-card>`.

> In this case, `<lib-header>` is not used and you would expect it to be tree shaken, but that is not what happens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, `<lib-header>` is not used and you would expect it to be tree-shaken, but that is not what happens.
```

This is because `LibCardComponent` actually contains two references to the `LibHeaderComponent`.

`@ContentChild(LibHeaderComponent) header: LibHeaderComponent;`

* One of these reference is in the *type position*-- that is, it specifies `LibHeaderComponent` as a type:

   `header: LibHeaderComponent;`

* The other reference is in the *value position*-- that is, LibHeaderComponent is the value of the `@ContentChild()` parameter decorator:

   `@ContentChild(LibHeaderComponent)`

The compiler handles token references in these positions differently.

* The compiler erases *type position* references after conversion from TypeScript, so they have no impact on tree-shaking.

> * The compiler must retain *value position*  references at runtime, which prevents the component from being tree shaken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The compiler must retain *value position*  references at runtime, which prevents the component from being tree-shaken.
```

> In the example, the compiler retains the `LibHeaderComponent` token that occurs in the value position, which prevents the referenced component from being tree shaken,  even if the application developer does not actually use `<lib-header>` anywhere.

Reviewer: OK, I see that "tree shaken" is used a lot. I think it should be "tree-shaken" (just like "tree-shaking") or "tree-shook". That is because we are using it in the phrase "being tree-shaken" rather than something like "shaking its tree" or "having its tree shaken".

If `LibHeaderComponent` is large (code, template, and styles), including it unnecessarily can significantly increase the size of the client application.

## When to use the lightweight-token pattern

The tree-shaking problem arises when a component is used as an injection token.
There are two cases when that can happen.

* The token is used in the value position of a query.
* The token is used as a Type specifier for constructor injection.

In the following example, both uses of the `OtherComponent` token cause retention of `OtherComponent` (that is, prevent it from being tree-shaken when it is not used).

```
class MyComponent {
  constructor(@Optional() other: OtherComponent) {}

  @ContentQuery(OtherComponent)
  other: OtherComponent|null;
}
```

> Although tokens used as  type specifiers alone are removed when converted to JavaScript, in this case TypeScript `--emitDecoratorMetadata` converts the type position to a value position, effectively changing `constructor(@Optional() other: OtherComponent)` to the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although tokens used only as type specifiers are removed when converted to JavaScript, in this case TypeScript `--emitDecoratorMetadata` converts the type position to a value position, effectively changing `constructor(@Optional() other: OtherComponent)` to the following:
```

Author: Style guide specifies a period before examples. I don't like it either.

`constructor(@Optional() @Inject(OtherComponent) other)`

> This token is now in a value position, and causes the tree-shaker to retain the reference.

Reviewer: Should this be "tree shaker"? It's the only case I've seen so far that wouldn't require a hyphen.

<div class="alert is helpful">

For all services, a library should use tree-shakable providers, providing dependencies at the root level rather than in component constructors.

</div>

## Using lightweight tokens

The lightweight-token design pattern consists of using a small abstract class as an injection token, and providing the actual implementation at a later stage.
The abstract class is retained (not tree-shaken), but it is small and has no material impact on the application size.

The following example shows how this works for the `LibHeaderComponent`.

```
abstract class LibHeaderToken {}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-header',
  providers: [
    {provide: LibHeaderToken, useExisting: LibHeaderComponent}
  ]
  ...,
})
class LibHeaderComponent extends LibHeaderToken {}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-card',
  ...,
})
class LibCardComponent {
  @ContentChild(LibHeaderToken) header: LibHeaderToken|null = null;
}
```

In this example, the `LibCardComponent` implementation no longer refers to `LibHeaderComponent` in either the type position or the value position.

> This allows full tree shaking of `LibHeaderComponent` to take place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows full tree-shaking of `LibHeaderComponent` to take place.
```

The implementation of the method (with all of its code overhead) resides in the injectable component that can be tree-shaken.
This allows the parent to communicate with the child (if it is present) in a type-safe manner.

For example, the `LibCardComponent` now queries`LibHeaderToken` rather than `LibHeaderComponent`.
The following example shows how the pattern allows `LibCardComponent` to communicate with the `LibHeaderComponent` without actually referring to `LibHeaderComponent`.

```
abstract class LibHeaderToken {
  abstract doSomething(): void;
}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-header',
  providers: [
    {provide: LibHeaderToken, useExisting: LibHeader}
  ]
  ...,
})
class LibHeaderComponent extends LibHeaderToken {
  doSomething(): void {
    // Concrete implementation of `doSomething`
  }
}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-card',
  ...,
})
class LibCardComponent implement AfterContentInit {
  @ContentChild(LibHeaderToken)
  header: LibHeaderToken|null = null;

  ngAfterContentInit(): void {
    this.header && this.header.doSomething();
  }
}
```

> Here the parent  queries the token to obtain the child component, and stores the resulting component reference if it is present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, the parent queries the token to obtain the child component, and stores the resulting component reference if it is present.
```

Before calling a method in the child, the parent component checks to see if the child component is present.
If the child component has been tree-shaken, there is no runtime reference to it, and no call to its method.

### Naming your lightweight token

Lightweight tokens are only useful with components. The Angular style guide suggests that you name components using the "Component" suffix. The example "LibHeaderComponent" follows this convention.

> To  maintain the relationship between the component and its token while still distinguishing between them, the recommended style is to use the component base name with the suffix "Token" to name your lightweight tokens: "LibHeaderToken".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To maintain the relationship between the component and its token while still distinguishing between them, the recommended style is to use the component base name with the suffix "Token" to name your lightweight tokens: "LibHeaderToken".
```

> # Optimizing client app size with lightweight tokens

Author: done - changed all instances

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-card',
  ...,
})
class LibCardComponent {
  @ContentChild(LibHeaderComponent)
  header: LibHeaderComponent|null = null;
}
```

Because `<lib-header>` is optional, the element can appear in the template in its minimal form,
`<lib-card></lib-card>`.
In this case, `<lib-header>` is not used and you would expect it to be tree-shaken, but that is not what happens.
This is because `LibCardComponent` actually contains two references to the `LibHeaderComponent`.

`@ContentChild(LibHeaderComponent) header: LibHeaderComponent;`

* One of these reference is in the *type position*-- that is, it specifies `LibHeaderComponent` as a type:

   `header: LibHeaderComponent;`

* The other reference is in the *value position*-- that is, LibHeaderComponent is the value of the `@ContentChild()` parameter decorator:

   `@ContentChild(LibHeaderComponent)`

The compiler handles token references in these positions differently.

* The compiler erases *type position* references after conversion from TypeScript, so they have no impact on tree-shaking.

* The compiler must retain *value position*  references at runtime, which prevents the component from being tree-shaken.

> In the example, the compiler retains the `LibHeaderComponent` token that occurs in the value position, which prevents the referenced component from being tree-shaken,  even if the application developer does not actually use `<lib-header>` anywhere.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example, the compiler retains the `LibHeaderComponent` token that occurs in the value position, which prevents the referenced component from being tree-shaken, even if the application developer does not actually use `<lib-header>` anywhere.
```

If `LibHeaderComponent` is large (code, template, and styles), including it unnecessarily can significantly increase the size of the client application.

> ## When to use the lightweight-token pattern

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## When to use the lightweight injection token pattern
```

The tree-shaking problem arises when a component is used as an injection token.
There are two cases when that can happen.

> * The token is used in the value position of a query.

Reviewer 2: can we link to any doc on "queries"?

Author: The only one I can find is in the Lifecycle Hooks guide -- https://angular.io/guide/lifecycle-hooks#using-aftercontent-hooks

> * The token is used as a Type specifier for constructor injection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The token is used as a type specifier for constructor injection.
```

In the following example, both uses of the `OtherComponent` token cause retention of `OtherComponent` (that is, prevent it from being tree-shaken when it is not used).

```
class MyComponent {
  constructor(@Optional() other: OtherComponent) {}

  @ContentQuery(OtherComponent)
  other: OtherComponent|null;
}
```

> Although tokens used only as type specifiers are removed when converted to JavaScript, in this case TypeScript `--emitDecoratorMetadata` converts the type position to a value position, effectively changing `constructor(@Optional() other: OtherComponent)` to the following.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although tokens used only as type specifiers are removed when converted to JavaScript, all tokens used for dependency injection are needed at runtime and are therefore converted to a form similar value position declaration — effectively changing `constructor(@Optional() other: OtherComponent)` to the following:
```

`constructor(@Optional() @Inject(OtherComponent) other)`

This token is now in a value position, and causes the tree shaker to retain the reference.

<div class="alert is helpful">

> For all services, a library should use tree-shakable providers, providing dependencies at the root level rather than in component constructors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all services, a library should use [tree-shakable providers](guide/dependency-injection-providers#tree-shakable-providers), providing dependencies at the root level rather than in component constructors.
```

</div>

> ## Using lightweight tokens

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Using lightweight injection tokens
```

> The lightweight-token design pattern consists of using a small abstract class as an injection token, and providing the actual implementation at a later stage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The lightweight injection token design pattern consists of using a small abstract class as an injection token, and providing the actual implementation at a later stage.
```

The abstract class is retained (not tree-shaken), but it is small and has no material impact on the application size.

The following example shows how this works for the `LibHeaderComponent`.

```
abstract class LibHeaderToken {}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-header',
  providers: [
    {provide: LibHeaderToken, useExisting: LibHeaderComponent}
  ]
  ...,
})
class LibHeaderComponent extends LibHeaderToken {}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-card',
  ...,
})
class LibCardComponent {

>   @ContentChild(LibHeaderToken) header: LibHeaderToken|null = null;

Reviewer 3: Awesome seeing that this document is coming to live! 💯 One thing I realized is that `ContentChild(ren)` or `ViewChild(en)` technically support tokens here, but the actual types **do not reflect** that.

e.g `InjectionToken is currently not assignable to Type<any>|Function|string`. Related issue: angular#21152

Reviewer 3: This is resolved now, and will be available in the upcoming minor version.

Reviewer 4: Thanks @devversion! Does that impact this documentation at all?

Reviewer 3: @Splaktar sorry for the delayed response. Not at all. I was just commenting here initially to make sure it's not merged until we actually _make it work_ as documented 😄

The following example shows how the pattern allows `LibCardComponent` to communicate with the `LibHeaderComponent` without actually referring to `LibHeaderComponent`.

```
abstract class LibHeaderToken {
  abstract doSomething(): void;
}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-header',
  providers: [
    {provide: LibHeaderToken, useExisting: LibHeader}
  ]
  ...,
})
class LibHeaderComponent extends LibHeaderToken {
  doSomething(): void {
    // Concrete implementation of `doSomething`
  }
}

@Component({
  selector: 'lib-card',
  ...,
})
class LibCardComponent implement AfterContentInit {
  @ContentChild(LibHeaderToken)
  header: LibHeaderToken|null = null;

  ngAfterContentInit(): void {
    this.header && this.header.doSomething();
  }
}
```

In this example the parent  queries the token to obtain the child component, and stores the resulting component reference if it is present.
Before calling a method in the child, the parent component checks to see if the child component is present.
If the child component has been tree-shaken, there is no runtime reference to it, and no call to its method.

> ### Naming your lightweight token

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Naming your lightweight injection token
```
